Nodes on Alex feedback:

Object capabilities in the title:
 YES OR NOT?

Sound= all objects involved in execution are valid

Yes, it is the right format, yes 25 pages+bib

I do not think line numbers would make it easier to discuss

no citation exists for the box pattern.

How is Void an odd return type for a setter method???

State contributionsExplicitly??
You really have to explain what you mean here

-restrict how/when the result of invariant methods change;
You seams to want to add an 's' at the end, but I think it would be wrong.

Why you want to remove foot note 6?

> you need to explain why you need OCs and why RCs are not sufficient.
Why?? I do not even explain why I need RCs!

>receiver of a field access
Why you want to say receiverS of a field access? it would be wrong!

>Some languages allows the \Q@this@ receiver to be implicit. For clarity in this work we require \Q@this@ to be always used explicit.

This footnote exists because a reviewr understood that we was preventing writing
this.foo() but believed he could still write foo().

>Talk about this in the OCap section
Do you mean the whole purity thing? 
moving it there may help to motivate them.

>involved in execution,
This is my original, sometimes you leave it as is, sometimes you want us to write
"involved in the exectution",
sometimes "involved in an execution"...
what is going on here? are you sure 
"involved in execution" is wrong? it looks right...

> of such method execution, either as return value, exception value,
You want to say valueS but is wrong.

>arrow on capsule mutator. No idea what it means

> the similar concept of owner-as-modifier
why "a" similar concept? "the" makes perfect sense...

>Thus a field update x.f=e is not a field access followed by an assignment.
2 reviers was confused by that, and was reading all our text talking about restrictions on field access as if we was including field updateds.

>section 4: Examples:
Ok, how do you want to call it?

>Explanation for pg 12:we will do it in person, hopefully then you can understand why we need OCs...

>The purpose of Monitor expressions ??
something on the line of "they represent our injected checks?"

I just can not understand your feedback on the end of section 5

>Conclusions: where is the hard work:
-Design
-Formal and Proof
-Case studies showing improvements
-Dissecting how any possible relaxation of our system breaks it.
If you know how to write a single sentence/paragraph to make this shine, you are welcome.



